

=== PAGE 1 ===

 
SYSC 5708 Model-Driven Development of 
Real-Time and Distributed Software Fall'2017 
PROJECT REPORT 
POINT OF SALES TERMINAL (POST) 
DEEPESH KHANEJA 
 
 
 
 
Submitted to Professor Dorina C. Petriu 
13 December, 2017 
Carleton University 


=== PAGE 2 ===

Problem Statement 
There is always a need of an efficient system that can generate and maintain the transaction receipts, 
inventory reports and sales records in the big retail businesses like Restaurants, Gas Stations, Convenience 
Stores, Retail Stores (Walmart, Loblaws) etc. The pu rpose of this system is to automate the checkout 
process, providing faster services and better purchasing experience for customers. Moreover, the system 
can keep the record of sales in the database operated on cloud which can be updated, modified, deleted 
as whenever is the case or required. Point of Sales(POS) is a computerized system managing sales and 
performs simple day to day operations in the retail stores. POS terminal building involves interfacing 
printer, bar code scanner, computer,  Debit/Credit Card Reader, keyboard, touch screen input, weighing 
machine and software on a CPU to run operations in a store. When the customer arrives with all the items 
to be purchased, the cashier scans item, pre -entered price shows up and the items are added with all 
information to the current running transaction. The barcode reader after scanning sends signal to retrieve 
name and price of item from the backend catalog and further interacts with inventory system for any 
discrepancy. The display interfaced will show the  individual price while scanning of each item and total 
price to the customer including all sales tax. The customer will decide the type of payment viz. cash, credit 
or debit card, coupons, Points/Promotion Card or cheque. On completion of successful trans action 
(payment done), the POS software updates the inventory and generates a receipt for customer and 
transaction record for Merchant. The cashier handovers the receipt record to the customer.  
 
In addition, the system requires user log in to use POS soft ware. Cashiers, Managers and administrators 
are the users that can access POS. Further, the protected and confidential system management functions 
can only be accessed by administrators for security purposes. These systems should be fault tolerant and 
have the capability to run offline sales and cash management when remote services are temporarily 
unavailable. It is assumed that self -checkout functionality is missing in the system described and always 
involves cashier for the transactions. 
 
COMET METHODOLOGY 
This project leverages COMET methodology to develop the Point of Sales System from  high level to low 
level designing. This method consists of three steps for software development, requirement modelling, 
analysis modelling and design modelling. These steps are described in detail with the supporting diagrams 
in the subsequent Sections. 
 
 
1. Requirement Modelling 
This section of the report is the starting point of building our system describing initial screening of the 
problem statement. The concept of basic design is construed into possible use cases and the diagram is 
termed as Use  Case Diagram. It includes ident ifying primary actors, system under development and its 
functionality in terms of used cases. For the selected use cases, a narrative description is provided.  
 
Fig 1. below depicts the use case diagram of POS terminal and the most important two use cases found 
are highlighted in green color. Checkout including scanning, applying reward points, calculating total price 
and payment is the first selected use case. Payment, which is part of checkout, can be by Debit/Credit, 
Cash or Loyality Card is the second use case diagram. 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 3 ===

a.  USE CASE DIAGRAM 
 
 
Fig. 1 Use Case Diagram of Point of Sales System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 4 ===

 
b.1 Use Case: Check out -Textual Description 
 
Use Case Name Check out 
Summary Customer finishes purchasing items and make payment 
 
Actors Store Customer and Cashier 
Preconditions Customer queue up to reach POS terminal and cashier is 
available 
Description 1. Customer arrives at POS terminal with all items to be 
purchased 
2. Cashier login and starts new sale 
3. Cashier scans the items to be purchased using bar code 
scanner  
4. System retrieves item specifications from catalogue and 
records sale line item, and  presents description, price, 
quantity and running total. Cashier repeat until last item is 
scanned. 
5. System calculates total price with taxes and display to 
customer 
6. Cashier asks the mode of payment 
7. Customer selects mode and make payment, and system 
handles the payment. 
8. System records completed sale and sends sale information 
to the external Inventory system for stock update. 
9. System presents the receipt. 
10. Customer leaves with receipt and all goods purchased. 
 
Alternatives 1. Customer cancels the transaction 
2. Cashier suspends the sale 
3. Cashier login failed. 
4. System hangs up or system crashes. 
5. Customer chooses to pay by cash but don’t have enough 
cash 
Post Conditions Payment is approved. Sale is recorded and saved in the 
system. Receipt is printed and inventory is updated. 
Table 1: Textual Description of Use Case Checkout 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 5 ===

 
b.2  Use Case: Payment – Textual Description 
 
Use Case Name Payment 
Summary Customer chooses the mode of payment 
Actors Store Customer  
Preconditions Cashier scanned all the items and total is available on display 
screen 
Description 1. Cashier asks for the mode of payment 
2. Customer chooses the mode of payment  either 
debit/credit, cash or reward/gift card. 
3. Cashier selects the method on POS software. 
4. Customer make the payment 
5. Payment approved message and receipt is generated. 
Alternatives 1. Customer chooses to pay by any combination of three 
payment methods. 
2. If customer chooses to pay by debit/ credit but enters the 
wrong pin. 
3. If customer selects card/debit payment and tap the card 
but tap is not applicable. 
4. If customer chooses to pay by cash but don’t have sufficient 
amount. 
5. If customer chooses to pay by gift or reward card but the 
balance is not enough. 
6. If customer enters the wrong pin three times, the card will 
be blocked. 
7. If the total sale amount is above $100, the tap on  card will 
not work. 
Post Conditions Payment is approved. 
Table 2: Textual Description of Use Case Payment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=== PAGE 6 ===

 
2. Analysis Modelling 
After the identification of use cases, next step is to  develop the structure of the model in progress. The 
two models –  static and dynamic are developed 
It involves identifying physical classes taking part in the system through physical classes diagram. Next, 
develop system context model demonstrating interaction among the classes and objects.  Entity -class 
diagram is a more detailed and complex version of physical class diagram stating all the operations and 
data storage done by entity classes. 
 
2.1  Static Analysis 
This step in the analysis phase determines the structural details of classes in the problem domain. It makes 
use of object structuring criteria to determine which objects are required for the analysis model. 
 
 
a. Physical Classes Diagram 
 
  
Fig. 2 Physical Classes Diagram 
 
 
 
Physical class diagram in Fig.2 illustrates the abstract classes of the system . Our system is POS terminal 
where a customer is served and consists all the hardware and software interface to complete checkout 
and payment. 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 7 ===

 
 
 
 
 
 
b. System Context Diagram 
 
 
Fig. 3 System Context Diagram of POST 
 
 
In the figure 3, it can be observed that external actors interact with the components of the system POS 
Terminal software and components provide input or output to the system. 
 
 
c. Entity Class Diagram 
The Entity class diagram in the figure 4 is quite self-explanatory. In order to provide more readability, the 
diagram contains classes and each class has its own attribute and operations to perform. Each store 


=== PAGE 8 ===

contains one or more POS terminals operated by one or more cashiers. The customer arrives in the store 
containing lot of items for purchasing and each item is described by product specification. Each store has 
a product catalogue containing product specification. They are stored in the database of the organization 
operated over cloud. The POS software captures all the sale transactions initiated by cashiers and further 
managed by a store Manager. The customer completes the transaction by choosing one of the following 
payment method – Cash, Debit/Credit or Loyalty Points Redemption. Each customer may or may not have 
a Loyalty points card. 
 
Fig. 4 Entity Class Diagram of POS system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 9 ===

d. External and Boundary Classes 
Fig. 5 represents external classes and boundary objects diagram. This diagram provides internal details of 
the system under development and providing interfaces to the external devices. On the other hand, 
System Context Diagram considers the system to be black box hiding all internal details. 
 
Fig. 5 External classes and boundary Object Diagram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Dynamic Analysis 
Realization of use cases from the requirement model i s done in this analysis to show objects which 
participate in each use case and their interaction. It consists of developing communication or sequence 
diagram along with state charts to show state dependent objects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 10 ===

a. Sequence Diagram of POS with no internal Details 
 
 
Fig. 6 Sequence Diagram of System with no internal details 
 
The sequence diagram shown above in figure considers the POS system as black box and two actors 
customer and cashier perform their operations. The happy path would be all items scanned successfully, 
payment is approved and receipt is generated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 11 ===

b. Sequence Diagram of Checkout 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Sequence Diagram of Check Out 
  
 
In the sequence diagram of Checkout  in fig. 7, primary actors cashier and customer interacts with other 
objects of the system  to complete the process. POS server, an application running on the computer is 
responsible for interfacing objects printer, display screen, bar code scanner. The server stores all their 
information in computer memory as well as in the database of product catalogue, product specification 
and inventory system on cloud. Sales in Line object represents the sales transaction of items to be sold. 
The happy paths are shown in red and blue bounding boxes. Scanning all the items through b ar code 
scanner by cashier, retrieving their information, displaying their unit prices and preparing a list completes 
the first phase of checkout process. 
 
Second phase is the successful payment made by the customer for which system generates receipt and 
cashier supply receipt to the customer. 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 12 ===

c. State Machine of Checkout 
The process of check out involves authorization of the user i.e. cashier with login id and password. The 
whole process is represented in the state machine of Checkout where system start s in idle state after 
login. As soon as the scanning of first item start, a new sale is created providing header to the bill receipt 
and items are lined up after retrieving their specification. Further scanning of items just adds up in the 
existing list and reaches idle state if no scanning is done. In the event of scan error due to bar code error, 
the cashier performs manual procedure of entering price, name and qty in the list. Once the last item 
signal is send to the application, the payment method is invoked which is chosen by the customer. Receipt 
is generated, inventory is updated and transaction is completed on approval of payment.    
  
 
Fig. 8 State Machine of Checkout 
 
d. Sequence Diagram of Payment 
The sequence diagram of payment  in Fig. 9 and 10  is the expansion of method of payment chosen by a 
customer during checkout. There are three possible options either by cash, credit/debit or Gift/Loyalty 
card. The sequence diagram shows all three options and possible alternatives. Happy paths are highlighted 
in the bounding box. Payment by credit/debit either requires tap or four digits secured pin. The card will 
be blocked if the wrong pins are entered three times and tap will not be applicable if the amount of 
purchase is greater than $100.On the other hand, payment by cash or Loyalty or card requires balance to 
be greater than or equal to the amount purchased. If the tap on the card is not activated, it requires the 
customer to insert card and enter secure pin to complete payment. The payment can also b e made by 
combination of either two from the three methods provided.  


=== PAGE 13 ===

 
Fig. 9 Sequence Diagram of Payment first part 
 
 


=== PAGE 14 ===

 
Fig. 10 Sequence diagram of Payment second part 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 15 ===

e. State Machine of Payment 
 
Fig. 11 State Machine of Payment 
 
 
The state machine in fig. 11 is an extension of payment method rom Checkout process. Once the payment 
state is reached, the system will wait for customer’s selection. If the chosen method is either cash or 
Gift/Loyalty card then the amount verification is done to ensure the balance is greater or equal to amount. 
Otherwise, if atm card payment is selected then after payment authorization, the card reader will wait for 
either tap or card insertion. The pin will be required if the card is inserted requiring pin validation. Aft er 
three wrong attempts, card will be blocked and customer’s selection will be required again. The 
transaction approved state will be reached if the payment is successful from either three methods or 
combination of two. 


=== PAGE 16 ===

 
The state machines described above follows the path of operations described in sequence diagrams. The 
possible alternatives and happy paths are included well. The sequence diagrams depict the process  as 
described in use cases  in sequential manner  whereas state charts depict that sequence th rough states 
maintaining the semantics of sequence diagrams.    
 
 
f. Integrated State Machine of Checkout and Payment 
 
 
Fig. 12 Integrated State chart of Checkout and Payment 
 
The integrated state  chart in fig. 12  consists of five composite states – Authorization state, Idle state, 
Processing new sale, Processing Payment state and Transaction completion state.  The state machines of 
checkout and payment are merged together in the integrated version and composite st ates are defined 
including possible alternatives. The states are grouped together to form super states or composite states 
representing a hierarchical structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 17 ===

 
3. Design Modelling 
In this last step of Comet Methodology, the software architecture is designed mapping analysis model to 
operational environment. Using subsystem criteria, the system is structured into subsystems. The 
following sections illustrate with diagram the process of subsystem structuring, designing high and low 
level details. Finally, designing the concurrent task architecture of subsystems. The final distributed 
architecture is shown which integrates the lowlevel details of subsystems to show concurrent 
collaboration diagram. Lastly, an example deployment diagram is shown in fig. 22. 
 
 
3.1 Overall Software Architecture 
 
a. Structure of Subsystems 
 
Fig. 13 Structuring of subsystems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 18 ===

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. Defining Interfaces 
 
 
Fig. 14 Identifying Interfaces used in Low level and Distributed Diagrams 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 19 ===

 
 
 
 
 
 
c.1 High Level Distributed Architecture of the POS system 
 
 
Fig. 15 High Level structure of whole system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 20 ===

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c.2 Low Level Diagram of individual subsystems 
 
 
Fig. 16 Low level Diagram of Application Control Subsystem 
 
 
 
 
                            
Fig. 17 Low level Diagram of Data Subsystem 
 
 


=== PAGE 21 ===

 
Fig. 18 Low Level Diagram of Payment Subsystem 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 19 Low Level Diagram of Sales Record Subsystem 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 20 Low Level Diagram of Application Server Subsystem 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 22 ===

3.2 Distributed Task Architecture Diagram 
This diagram is the integration of individual subsystems defined above illustrating the concurrent task 
architecture. Instead of designing the individual distributed components, this is a attempt to collaborate 
all of them into one subsystem. However, each sub system can be distinguished from the other subsystem 
in the fig. 21. 
 
 
Fig. 21 Distributed Task Architecture of Concurrent Collaboration Diagram of whole system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 23 ===

 
 
 
 
Deployment Diagram 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion and Future Work 
POS is an efficient method to automate the checkout process, providing faster and better customer experience.  It 
can be found almost in every Retail store, Restaurants, Clubs and Bars, Supermarkets . Comet methodology proves 
useful in building system from requirement modelling to design modelling.  Future work include s developing the 
adding self-checkout functionalities. 
 
 
 
References 
■ http://www.programsformca.com/2012/03/uml-diagrams-point-of-sale-terminal.html 
■ http://www.csie.ntut.edu.tw/sdrc/files/course/20061201/SoftwareRequirementSpecification.pdf 
■ http://softeng.polito.it/tongji/SE/ex/The-POS-system.pdf 
■ “Restaurant Point-of-Sale System”, by Moustafa H.Abdelbaky et al. 
 
